W-14237985 mtf (#232)
mulesoft/docs-mule-sdk: modules/ROOT/pages/munit-extensions-maven-plugin-configuration.adoc

= Configuring the MUnit Extensions Maven Plugin
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

The MUnit Extensions Maven plugin provides testing capabilities for extension development. Learn how to configure the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin to test your modules. 

== Specify Additional Argument Lines

Because you run the tests in a new JVM, you can specify additional argument lines to the JVM. Specify each argument in a separate `argLine`.

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <argLines>
          <argLine>-XX:MaxPermSize=512m</argLine>
          <argLine>-Xmx1024m</argLine>
      </argLines>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

== Enable Runtime Discovery

Runtime discovery looks for all Mule runtime versions published on Nexus to run
against your tests.

> To enable runtime discovery, add the following configuration to the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable runtime discovery for all released CE runtimes, add the following configuration to the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin:
```

> To enable runtime discovery, add the following configuration to the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin:

Reviewer: Instead of having a single callout, I would rewrite this by showing a variable in monospace instead of "CE." You can say what the variable stands for either in the lead-in text or after the configuration text. This should not be in a note. If you have this text after the configuration, put it right after so the thought is not broken up.

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <runtimeConfiguration>
          <discoverRuntimes>
              <product>CE</product> //<1>
          </discoverRuntimes>
      </runtimeConfiguration>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----
[calloutlist]
.. This enables the runtime discovery feature for all released CE runtimes.

> From the command line, the property is `discoverRuntimes.product`.

Reviewer: Global: consider using text like this to get around using a passive:
From the command line, use the `discoverRuntimes.product` property to enable runtime discovery."

NOTE: The `product` can be CE (Community Edition), EE (Enterprise Edition), or ALL (both CE and EE).

=== Include Snapshots

To include snapshot versions of Mule runtime, add the following line to the runtime configuration:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<runtimeConfiguration>
    <discoverRuntimes>
        <product>CE</product>
        <includeSnapshots>true</includeSnapshots>
    </discoverRuntimes>
</runtimeConfiguration>
----

From the command line, the property is `discoverRuntimes.includeSnapshots`. The default value is `false`.

=== Discover Only the Latest Patches

To discover only the latest patch versions of Mule runtime, add the following line to the runtime configuration:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<runtimeConfiguration>
    <discoverRuntimes>
        <product>CE</product>
        <latestPatches>true</latestPatches>
    </discoverRuntimes>
</runtimeConfiguration>
----

From the command line, the property is `discoverRuntimes.latestPatches`. The default value is `true`.

=== Discover Since a Minimum Version

> By default, runtime discovery searches for all Mule runtime versions since the `minMuleVersion` of the module. To change this minimum version, add the following line to the runtime configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, runtime discovery searches for all Mule runtime versions since the `minMuleVersion` of the module. To change the minimum version, add the following line to the runtime configuration:
```

=== Run Against Additional Runtimes

By default, the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin runs against the `minMuleVersion` and the required product of the module. To specify additional runtimes to run against, add the following lines to the runtime configuration:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<runtimeConfiguration>
    <additionalRuntimes>
        <additionalRuntime>MULE_EE:4.1.2</additionalRuntime>
        <additionalRuntime>MULE:4.1.1</additionalRuntime>
    </additionalRuntimes>
</runtimeConfiguration>
----

From the command line, the property is `additionalRuntimes`.

=== Skip Runtime Discovery

To skip runtime discovery, add the following line to the runtime configuration:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<runtimeConfiguration>
    <discoverRuntimes>
        <product>CE</product>
        <skip>true</skip>
    </discoverRuntimes>
</runtimeConfiguration>
----

From the command line, the property is `discoverRuntimes.skip`. The default value is `false`.

== Use Dynamic Ports

[IMPORTANT]
MUnit 2.2 and later introduces the `dynamic-port` global element, which you can use to define dynamic ports at the MUnit suite level. +

> Use this element instead of the plugin configuration described below to set the dynamic port both from Maven and Studio. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this element instead of the plugin configuration described below to set the dynamic port from both Maven and Studio. +
```

For more information about how to configure this element, refer to xref:munit::dynamic-ports.adoc[Dynamic Ports].

When testing a module in a continuous integration (CI) environment, you might encounter the following scenario:

`Your test tries to open a specific port. The port is already in use. The test fails with a port binding exception.`

> To solve this, use the dynamic ports built-in feature in the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin to have your test use a free port. Dynamic ports instruct the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin to look for unbound ports and reserves them before running the tests over the module. Each port selected is placed in a system property under the name indicated in the configuration. The test can acquire the port number through the use of placeholders afterward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To solve this, use the dynamic ports built-in feature in the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin to have your test use a free port. Dynamic ports instruct the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin to look for unbound ports and reserves them before running the tests over the module. Each selected port is placed in a system property under the name indicated in the configuration. The test can acquire the port number through the use of placeholders afterward.
```

> TIP: The ports to select by the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin are taken from the following range: `[40000,50000)`.

Reviewer: Does this need to be a TIP? It is not a good  practice to have two admonitions in a row.

> TIP: The ports to select by the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin are taken from the following range: `[40000,50000)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: The ports that the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin can select are in the following range: `[40000,50000)`.
```

> [CAUTION]

Reviewer: Not really a caution. It's either a tip or should have no admonition.

--
The dynamic ports feature is available only as part of the MUnit Extensions Maven Plugin. +

> You can't expect this feature to work when running tests from inside Anypoint Studio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature doesn't work when running tests from inside Anypoint Studio.
```

--

=== Enable Dynamic Ports

To enable the dynamic ports feature, add the following code to the `configuration` section of the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
    ...
    <dynamicPorts>
      <dynamicPort>a.dynamic.port</dynamicPort>
    </dynamicPorts>
    ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

If you have the `${http.port}` placeholder in your test, the configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<dynamicPorts>
  <dynamicPort>http.port</dynamicPort>
</dynamicPorts>
----

== Disable Surefire Reports

> MUnit has built-in support for Surefire. No additional configuration is needed but it can be disabled if not needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MUnit has built-in support for Surefire. You can disable this support if it's not needed.
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<enableSurefireReports>false</enableSurefireReports>
----

> The reports can be found under `${project.build.directory}/surefire-reports`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reports are located under `${project.build.directory}/surefire-reports`.
```

The default value is `true`.

== Run Specific Tests

> To run specific tests, add a line for the specific test:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run specific tests, add a line for each specific test:
```

Reviewer: If you can only run one specific test, change the lead-in to singular.

Global: can you specify the tag to use in the lead-in? "Add an xxx tag for each specific test."

When I put the tag name here, it disappears!

Reviewer: Global: Earlier, you qualify the lead-ins with this text: "to the configuration section of the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin."

The lead-ins should be consistent.

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
      <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
      <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <configuration>
      ...
      <munitTest>example-MunitTest-suite.xml</munitTest>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

== Run Tests with Specific Tags

> To run tests with specific tags, add a line for the test with the specific tag:

Reviewer: Same comment as before

> To run tests with specific tags, add a line for the test with the specific tag:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run tests with specific tags, add the <munitTags> tag for each specific test. Separate the tags with commas:
```

Reviewer: I would show multiple tags in the example.

> To run tests with specific tags, add a line for the test with the specific tag:

Reviewer: Global, instead of saying "add a line," specify the tag that is used.

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
      <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
      <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <configuration>
      ...
      <munitTags>exampleMunitTag</munitTags>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

> You can specify more than one tag by separating them with a comma.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify multiple tags by separating the tags with commas.
```

> You can specify more than one tag by separating them with a comma.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

== Skip MUnit Tests

> To skip MUnit tests, add a line to skip MUnit tests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To skip MUnit tests, add the <skipMunitTests> tag to the configuration section of the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
      <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
      <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <configuration>
      ...
      <skipMunitTests>True</skipMunitTests>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

== Skip Tests After One Suite Fails

To skip the rest of the tests if one test suite fails, add a line to skip after failure:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
      <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
      <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <configuration>
      ...
      <skipAfterFailure>true</skipAfterFailure>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

The default value is `false`.

== Specify the Mule Runtime Version

To specify the Mule runtime version that your tested module runs on, add a line for the Mule runtime version:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <runtimeVersion>1.2.3</runtimeVersion>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

> WARNING: If this option is set, runtime discovery and `additionalRuntimes` don't take effect.

Reviewer: I don't think this qualifies as a WARNING. From the Style Guide:

WARNING
Use instead of CAUTION to alert users that failure to perform an action can result in a loss of data or put the customer in an unrecoverable state. Be sure to include enough information so that the customer understands the consequences of the choice or recommendation.

== Specify the Runtime Product

You can specify the type of runtime that your tested module runs on. 

> The two possible values are `MULE` for Community Edition, and `MULE_EE` for Enterprise Edition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values are `MULE` for Community Edition, and `MULE_EE` for Enterprise Edition.
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <runtimeProduct>MULE</runtimeProduct>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

> WARNING: If this option is set, runtime discovery and `additionalRuntimes` don't take effect.

Reviewer: See the previous comment. I won't continue to mark these.

== Specify the JVM

> You can specify the JVM (or the Java executable) that your tested module runs on. Populate the property with the path to the executable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify the JVM (or the Java executable) that your tested module runs on. Populate the property with the path to the executable.
```
```suggestion
To specify the JVM (Java executable) that your tested module runs on, populate the <jvm> tag with the path to the executable.
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <jvm>/path/to/jdk/bin/java</jvm>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

From the command line, the property is `-Dmunit.jvm`.

== Set Environment Variables

To set additional environment variables during the test run, specify them with the respective key and value:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <environmentVariables>
        <MY_ENV>exampleValue</MY_ENV>
        <MY_OTHER_ENV>val2</MY_OTHER_ENV>
      </environmentVariables>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

> Use environment variables to replace placeholders such as `${MY_ENV}` (from the example above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use environment variables to replace  `${MY_ENV}` and `${MY_LOTHER_ENV}`.
```

== Redirect Test Output to a File

> When running several tests, the build output can be complicated to read. You can redirect the build output of each test suite to a file so the build output contains the test results and the respective file contains standard output of each test suite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running several tests, the build output can be complicated to read. You can redirect the build output of each test suite to a file so that the build output contains the test results and the respective file contains the standard output of each test suite.
```

To keep the build output clean, the test run output that doesn't belong to a particular suite doesn't print, but you can enable it by running Maven in debug mode.

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <redirectTestOutputToFile>true</redirectTestOutputToFile>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

The default value is `false`.

== Define System Properties Variables

You can define specific system variables needed for your MUnit test to run successfully:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <systemPropertyVariables>
        <my.property.key>my.property.value</my.property.key>
      </systemPropertyVariables>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

> [TIP]

Reviewer: The text is too long for a tip.

====
Depending on the execution context, the system properties values might vary. When referencing these properties, override their value to enforce test reproducibility.

You can do so by using the ­`-D` argument when running MUnit with Maven. +
Variables passed with the `-D` argument take full priority over any other property.

For example:

`-Dmy.property.key=my.property.another.value`
====

== Test Output Directory

You can choose the location where the test output files are created.
The specified path can be an absolute path or a Maven placeholder.

> .Test output directory with an absolute path

Reviewer: Why is there a period here? Did you want this to be an unordered list?

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <testOutputDirectory>/my/absolute/path</testOutputDirectory>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

.Test output directory with a Maven placeholder
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<testOutputDirectory>${project.build.directory}/my/output/folder</testOutputDirectory>
----

By default, the files are created in `${project.build.directory}/munit-reports/output/`.

== Specify Shared Libraries

When requiring external libraries (as explained in xref:external-libs.adoc[]), specify

> these libraries as `sharedLibraries` (apart from having the corresponding dependencies in the project).

Reviewer: Not clear what you mean by this text (apart...).

For example, if you define the following external library in your module:

[source,java,linenums]
----
@ExternalLib(name = "My External Library",
requiredClassName = "com.example.MyClass",
coordinates = "com.example:my-external-library:1.2.3")
----

You must configure the plugin in the following way:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
      <sharedLibraries>
          <sharedLibrary>
              <groupId>com.example</groupId>
              <artifactId>my-external-library</artifactId>
          </sharedLibrary>
      </sharedLibraries>
      ...
    </configuration>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

== Import External Suites and Resources

> To reuse suite files that are present in an external artifact across different modules, include the suite files in the configuration as if they are present in the `src/test/munit` and `src/test/resources` folders. Ensure you add the dependencies in the plugin's classpath.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reuse suite files that are present in an external artifact across different modules, include the suite files in the configuration as if they are present in the `src/test/munit` and `src/test/resources` folders. Ensure that you add the dependencies in the plugin's classpath.
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<plugins>
  <plugin>
    <groupId>com.mulesoft.munit.tools</groupId>
    <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <configuration>
      ...
        <externalSuites>
            <externalSuite>suite1.xml</externalSuite>
            <externalSuite>suite2.xml</externalSuite>
        </externalSuites>
        <externalResources>
            <externalResource>example.json</externalResource>
        </externalResources>
      ...
    </configuration>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>com.example</groupId>
            <artifactId>my-dependency</artifactId>
            <version>1.0.0</version>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
  </plugin>
</plugins>
----

> If any of the suite files or resources are not present in the classpath, the plugin fails.

Reviewer: Suggest changing "are not" to "aren't."

      <artifactId>munit-extensions-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <configuration>
      ...

>       <munitTags>exampleMunitTag,exampleMunitTag2</munitTags>

Reviewer: Is the 2 correct here?

>       <munitTags>exampleMunitTag,exampleMunitTag2</munitTags>

Reviewer: This is an example and not really the syntax. I would add a "for example" to the lead-in and would show at least two tags so you can show them separated by commas.

== Skip Tests After One Suite Fails

> To skip the rest of the tests if one test suite fails, add a `skipAfterFailure` property to skip after failure to the configuration section of the MUnit Extensions Maven plugin:

Reviewer: The "to skip after failure" is not needed.
